https://www.webopedia.com/TERM/D/database.html

Webopedia
Enter a term...
Search
Advertiser Disclosure
MAIN
BROWSE TERMS
DID YOU KNOW?
REFERENCE
ALL CATEGORIES
STUDY GUIDES
BLOG
SLIDESHOWS
SPONSORED
Main » TERM » D »
database


By Vangie Beal
Related Terms
DB2 - Database 2
OLE DB
database administrator (DBA)
configuration management database
DBMS - database management system
database software
database engine
database server
distributed database
RDBMS - relational database management system
A database, often abbreviated as DB, is a collection of information organized in such a way that a computer program can quickly select desired pieces of data.

Fields, Records and Files
You can think of a traditional database as an electronic filing system, organized by fields, records, and files. A field is a single piece of information; a record is one complete set of fields; and a file is a collection of records. For example, a telephone book is analogous to a file. It contains a list of records, each of which consists of three fields: name, address, and telephone number.

An alternative concept in database design is known as Hypertext. In a Hypertext database, any object, whether it be a piece of text, a picture, or a film, can be linked to any other object. Hypertext databases are particularly useful for organizing large amounts of disparate information, but they are not designed for numerical analysis.

To access information from a database, you need a database management system (DBMS). This is a collection of programs that enables you to enter, organize, and select data in a database.

Database

Increasingly, the term database is used as shorthand for database management system. There are many different types of DBMSs, ranging from small systems that run on personal computers to huge systems that run on mainframes.







PREVIOUS
data warehouse
NEXT
database administrator (DBA)


Related Links
Database Journal
ASP Data Access for Beginners
Enterprise Database (white paper)
Benchmarking Top NoSQL Databases (white paper)
Top Enterprise Databases to Consider

WEBOPEDIA NEWS
Stay up to date on the latest developments in Internet terminology with a free newsletter from Webopedia. Join to subscribe now.

Email address

LATEST ARTICLES
Texting & Chat Abbreviations
From A3 to ZZZ this guide lists 1,500 text message and online chat abbreviations to help you translate and understand today's texting lingo. Read More »

List of Well-Known TCP Port Numbers
Port numbers 0 to 1024 are reserved for privileged services and designated as well-known ports. This list of port numbers  are specified in... Read More »

STUDY GUIDES
Computer Architecture Study Guide
Computer architecture provides an introduction to system design basics for most computer science students. Read More »

Network Fundamentals Study Guide
Networking fundamentals teaches the building blocks of modern network design. Learn different types of networks, concepts, architecture and... Read More »

The Five Generations of Computers
Learn about each of the five generations of computers and major technology developments that have led to the computing devices that we use... Read More »


Browse Technology Definitions:
ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZ_0123456789
Webopedia
Enter a term...

Definitions:
Browse Terms
Previous Terms
Recent Terms
All Categories
Articles:
Blog
Did You Know
Quick Reference
Study Guides
Slideshows

Site Logo
An eWEEK Property
Terms of Service | Licensing & Reprints | About Us | Privacy Policy | Contact Us | Advertise | Sitemap
Copyright 2019 QuinStreet Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Advertiser Disclosure: Some of the products that appear on this site are from companies from which QuinStreet receives compensation. This compensation may impact how and where products appear on this site including, for example, the order in which they appear. QuinStreet does not include all companies or all types of products available in the marketplace.