https://study.com/academy/lesson/what-are-databases-examples-types-quiz.html

for Teachers for Schools for Working Scholars for College Credit
Study.com
1	Log in	
Search Courses & Lessons

Plans
Courses
Credit
Degrees
Schools
 Information Systems: Help and Review  /  Business CoursesNext Lesson 
What are Databases? - Examples & Types
Chapter 11 /  Lesson 12   Transcript
Video 
Quiz 
Course
 Save  Timeline Autoplay  Speed Normal Audio mode 490K views
Qamar C.
Teacher
New Jersey, United States
03/01/2018
I love that I am able to find a lesson for almost anything I am searching forI also love how effective (and animated) the teachers are with explaining the lessons
Recommended Lessons and Courses for You
Related LessonsRelated Courses
Flat File Database: Definition & Example
Flat File Database: Definition & Example
Medical Terminology for Tissues, Organs & Glands
Medical Terminology for Tissues, Organs & Glands
What is a Relational Database? - Elements, Design & Advantages
What is a Relational Database? - Elements, Design & Advantages
Database Concepts and Structures: The Elements That Make Up a Database
Database Concepts and Structures: The Elements That Make Up a Database
Lesson Transcript
Instructor: Szymon Machajewski
Szymon has a PhD in Education, an MS in Information Management and a BS in Computer Science. He has taught Computer Science at a number of Higher Education institutions.

In this lesson, we'll be looking at databases, which are computer mechanisms for storing and retrieving data. Test your knowledge following the lesson with a quiz.
Defining Databases
Databases are basically containers for data. Because a public library stores books, we could also say that a library is a database of books. But strictly defined, databases are computer structures that save, organize, protect, and deliver data. A system that contains databases is called a database management system, or DBM. The typical diagram representation for a database is a cylinder.

Types of Databases
The simplest form of databases is a text database. When data is organized in a text file in rows and columns, it can be used to store, organize, protect, and retrieve data. Saving a list of names in a file, starting with first name and followed by last name, would be a simple database. Each row of the file represents a record. You can update records by changing specific names, you can remove rows by deleting lines, and you can add new rows by adding new lines.

Desktop database programs are another type of database that's more complex than a text database but intended for a single user. A Microsoft Excel spreadsheet or Microsoft Access are good examples of desktop database programs. These programs allow users to enter data, store it, protect it, and retrieve it when needed. The benefit of desktop database programs over text databases is the speed of changing data, and the ability to store large amounts of data while keeping performance of the system manageable.

Relational databases are the most common database systems. They include databases like SQL Server, Oracle Database, Sybase, Informix, and MySQL. The relational database management systems (RDMS) feature much better performance for managing data over desktop database programs. For example, they allow multiple users (even thousands!) to work with the data at the same time, creating advanced security for access to the data. RDBMS systems store data in columns and rows, which in turn make up tables. A table in RDBMS is like a spreadsheet. A set of tables makes up a schema. A number of schemas create a database. Many databases can be created on a single server.

The most innovative structures for storing data today are NoSQL and object-oriented databases. These do not follow the table/row/column approach of RDBMS. Instead, they build bookshelves of elements and allow access per bookshelf. So, instead of tracking individual words in books, NoSQL and object-oriented databases narrow down the data you are looking for by pointing you to the bookshelf, then a mechanical assistant works with the books to identify the exact word you are looking for. NoSQL specifically attempts to simplify bookshelves by storing data in a denormalized way; this means storing it in large chunks.

Normalization is a database business process to break up data into the smallest possible parts. Instead of storing first and last name in one bucket, or field, normalization requires that you store the first name separately from the last name. This is helpful if you want to sort the data by last name or by first name. RDBMS systems require that data is normalized.

Databases Categorized by Local Design
Depending on how databases are designed, they can be divided into operational databases and database warehouses. When databases store everyday data with fast updates, they're transactional or operational. These are most common. For example, inventory databases and product databases are all operational. Such databases require high speed of writing and high speed of reading. This makes them special and very sensitive to performance.

 To unlock this lesson you must be a Study.com Member. Create your account

Register to view this lesson
Are you a student or a teacher?
 
 You are viewing lesson 12 in chapter 11 of the course:
Information Systems: Help and Review
19 chapters | 388 lessons | 4 flashcard sets

Ch 1. Introduction to Computers: Help and...
Ch 2. Information Systems in...
Ch 3. Hardware and Systems Technology:...
Ch 4. Systems Software and Application...
Ch 5. Internet, Intranet, and Extranet:...
Ch 6. Network Systems Technology: Help...
Ch 7. Remote Connections: Help and...
Ch 8. Enterprise Business Systems: Help...
Ch 9. Decision Support & Specialized...
Ch 10. Systems Development: Help and...
Ch 11. Data Management: Help and Review
What is Database Management? - How Databases Help Organizations7:09
Database Concepts and Structures: The Elements That Make Up a Database6:24
What is a Database Management System? - Purpose and Function10:03
Models of Database Management Systems (DBMS)10:03
What is a Relational Database? - Elements, Design & Advantages10:19
Types of Data: Text, Numbers & Multimedia11:43
Structured Query Language: Manipulating Databases Using SQL8:06
Data Warehousing and Data Mining: Information for Business Intelligence6:46
Database Administration and Security: Definition and Purpose6:23
Cloud Computing and Databases: Technology to Improve Database Management5:55
What is a Data Flow Diagram?
What are Databases? - Examples & Types7:37
5:17
Next Lesson

Arithmetic Logic Unit (ALU): Definition, Design & FunctionArithmetic Logic Unit (ALU): Definition, Design & Function
What is a Number Sentence? - Definition & Examples3:05
What is Data Consolidation? - Definition & Overview4:44
What Is Memory Management? - Requirements, Errors & Techniques
Associative Memory in Computer Architecture3:05
Naive Bayes Classifier: Algorithm & Examples
Abstract Data Models
Go toData Management: Help and Review
Ch 12. Ethical, Social & Business Issues...
Information Technology: Impact on the Economy7:40
Impact of Technology on Privacy10:43
Intellectual Property and Open Source Software: Issues and Concerns12:54
Impact of e-Commerce and m-Commerce on Consumer Privacy and Fraud13:52
Ergonomics, Telecommuting, Virtual Teams & Job Design: Technology Effects on Careers7:56
Globalization, Outsourcing & Insourcing: Impact of Technology on Careers7:06
Computer Security & Threat Prevention for Individuals & Organizations10:01
What is an Electronic Funds Transfer? - Definition, Process & Benefits6:56
Virtual Communities: Definition, Types & Examples6:52
What Are Collaboration Tools? - Definition & Types3:49
What is a Privacy Policy? - Definition & Examples3:41
What Is a Virtual Meeting? - Technology & Strategies3:54
What Is a Webinar? - Definition & Tools
What is a Worm Virus? - Definition, Examples & Removal Tools5:10
What is Adware? - Definition, Protection & Removal Tools5:03
What is ANSI? - Standards & Regulations
Go toEthical, Social & Business Issues in IT: Help & Review
Ch 13. Introduction to Programming: Help...
Ch 14. Learning Computer...
Ch 15. Business, Social & Ethical...
Ch 16. Working with Java
Ch 17. Java Programming...
Ch 18. Java Programming...
Ch 19. Java Programming...
What are Databases? - Examples & Types Related Study Materials
RelatedRecently UpdatedPopularExplore Subjects
Browse by Courses
Business Courses
Computer Science Courses
Information Systems Courses
Tech Skills Courses
Information Technology Courses
PHR-CA/SPHR-CA Certification Exam: Practice & Study Guide
Business 113: Business Communication
PARCC ELA - Grade 11: Test Prep & Practice
Improving Customer Experience
Critical Thinking, Problem Solving & Decision Making
Improving Customer Service Leadership
Building a Customer Service Team
Building & Launching a Successful Team
Providing High Quality Customer Service
Accounting 301: Applied Managerial Accounting
Business 308: Globalization & International Management
MTTC Mathematics (Elementary) (089): Practice & Study Guide
Business 306: Strategic Human Resources Management
Browse by Lessons
How Ideas Are Connected in a Text
Remarks to the Senate in Support of a Declaration of Conscience
Identifying Multiple Themes & Theme Hierarchy
Using Key Information to Identify Different Types of Novels
Short Stories: Types & Examples
Quiz & Worksheet - Team Effectiveness in Organizations
Quiz & Worksheet - Types of Communication Strategies
Quiz & Worksheet - Collaboration in Businesses
Quiz & Worksheet - Efficient Communication
Quiz & Worksheet - Business Report Writing
PARCC ELA - Grade 10: Reflective & Research Writing
PARCC ELA - Grade 10: Organizing Ideas in an Essay
PARCC ELA - Grade 10: Types of Essays
PARCC ELA - Grade 10: Writing Successful Essays
PARCC ELA - Grade 10: Language Facility
Create an account to start this course today
Try it risk-free for 30 days!
Explore our library of over 79,000 lessons
Search
Search Courses & Lessons
BrowseBrowse by subject
Plans
Student Solutions
Teacher Solutions
Study.com for Schools
Working Scholars Solutions
About Us
Blog
Careers
Get Your School Listed
Teach For Us
Press Center
Support
Contact Support
FAQ
Site Feedback
Download the app
Get it on Google PlayGet it on the App Store  
Working ScholarsWorking Scholars Bringing Tuition-Free College to the Community
© copyright 2003-2019 Study.com. All other trademarks and copyrights are the property of their respective owners. All rights reserved.
Terms of Use   Privacy Policy   DMCA Notice   ADA Compliance   Honor Code For Students
Support