https://whatis.techtarget.com/definition/algorithm

TechTargetSearch Thousands of Tech Definitions
Search Thousands of Tech Definitions

Browse Definitions :
ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZ#
LOGIN REGISTER
TECHTARGET NETWORKFILE EXTENSIONSWRITING FOR BUSINESSRSS
WhatIs.com
BROWSE DEFINITIONS
Mathematics
QUICK STUDYResourcesFollow: 
Home Topics AppDev Programming algorithm
DEFINITION
algorithm

Posted by: Margaret Rouse
WhatIs.com
  
Contributor(s): Fouad Tawfiq and Ali
An algorithm (pronounced AL-go-rith-um) is a procedure or formula for solving a problem, based on conducting a sequence of specified actions. A computer program can be viewed as an elaborate algorithm. In mathematics and computer science, an algorithm usually means a small procedure that solves a recurrent problem.

Algorithms are widely used throughout all areas of IT (information technology). A search engine algorithm, for example, takes search strings of keywords and operators as input, searches its associated database for relevant web pages, and returns results.

An encryption algorithm transforms data according to specified actions to protect it. A secret key algorithm such as the U.S. Department of Defense's Data Encryption Standard (DES), for example, uses the same key to encrypt and decrypt data. As long as the algorithm is sufficiently sophisticated, no one lacking the key can decrypt the data.

The word algorithm derives from the name of the mathematician, Mohammed ibn-Musa al-Khwarizmi, who was part of the royal court in Baghdad and who lived from about 780 to 850. Al-Khwarizmi's work is the likely source for the word algebra as well.

Khan Academy provides an introductory tutorial on algorithms:




This was last updated in March 2019
Continue Reading About algorithm
SearchSecurity.com has an article on the two basic types of encryption algorithms.
Comprehensive software testing and complex algorithms
How algorithms rule the world
Can work allocation algorithms play fair?
Related Terms
data analytics (DA)
Data analytics (DA) is the science of examining raw data with the purpose of drawing conclusions about that information. See complete definition
independent variable
An independent variable is a variable that is manipulated to determine the value of a dependent variable. See complete definition
unique identifier (UID)
A unique identifier (UID) is a numeric or alphanumeric string that is associated with a single entity within a given system. See complete definition
Word of the Day
corporate activism
Corporate activism is a public stance taken by a large enterprise to positively impact social change or legislation. According to some estimates, corporate activism through "cause marketing" will contribute more than $1.5 billion to charitable organizations this year.

Word of the Day Archive
20 Newest and Updated Terms
Platform as a Service (PaaS)
TCP (Transmission Control Protocol)
team collaboration tools
CloudOps (cloud operations)
finite element analysis (FEA)
remote wipe
application containerization (app containerization)
DMZ (networking)
quantum supremacy
augmented learning
cost per engagement (CPE)
asset turnover ratio
Microsoft Power Platform
days sales outstanding (DSO)
virtual desktop infrastructure (VDI)
IT operations
Jenkins
Agile Software Development
Australian Assistance and Access Bill
dependency injection
Join the conversation 5 comments

 Send me notifications when other members comment.
Add My Comment
Oldest 
[-] AnonymousUser - 9 Apr 2014 1:02 AM
An algorithm (pronounced AL-go-rith-um) is a procedure or formula for solving a problem.
 
[-] AlemuBeyene - 3 May 2017 4:30 AM
How can I get a GIS algorithms?
 
[-] sigmus50 - 22 May 2017 6:40 AM
Algorithms: It is a step by step procedure of solving a problem.
E.g. 1
Consider a problem of multiplying two numbers
Solution
Step 1: Input the numbers as a and b
Step 2: Find the product of a x b
Step 3: Print the result

E.g. 2
To add two numbers
Solution
Step 1: Input the numbers as x, y
Step 2: Sum=x+y
Step 3: Print Sum

Note: The pictorial representation of algorithm is called Flow Chart.

 
[-] godwintony - 26 Jun 2019 12:58 PM
what is algorithm?
 
[-] zohaibkhan2017 - 9 Oct 2019 4:08 PM
Please everyone person I have suggest which algorithm used in Management Information System for example (school management system,bank management system) and the work for data secure
 
File Extensions and File Formats
ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZ#
Latest TechTarget
resources
COMPLIANCE
SECURITY
HEALTH IT
DISASTER RECOVERY
STORAGE
SearchCompliance
risk management
Risk management is the process of identifying, assessing and controlling threats to an organization's capital and earnings.

compliance as a service (CaaS)
Compliance as a Service (CaaS) is a cloud service service level agreement (SLA) that specified how a managed service provider (...

data protection impact assessment (DPIA)
A data protection impact assessment (DPIA) is a process designed to help organizations determine how data processing systems, ...

Browse by Topic Browse Resources File Extensions
About Us Contact Us Privacy Policy Advertisers Business Partners Events Media Kit Corporate Site Reprints Site Map Archive
All Rights Reserved, Copyright 1999 - 2019, TechTarget

