https://www.webopedia.com/TERM/A/algorithm.html

Webopedia
Enter a term...
Search
Advertiser Disclosure
MAIN
BROWSE TERMS
DID YOU KNOW?
REFERENCE
ALL CATEGORIES
STUDY GUIDES
BLOG
SLIDESHOWS
SPONSORED
Main » TERM » A »
algorithm


By Vangie Beal
Related Terms
Luhn formula
formula
instruction
Formula Bar
array formula
instruction cycle
instruction set
encryption algorithm
FORTRAN - formula translator
Instruction-Level Parallelism
(al´g&-rith-&m) (n.) An algorithm is a formula or set of steps for solving a particular problem. To be an algorithm, a set of rules must be unambiguous and have a clear stopping point. Algorithms can be expressed in any language, from natural languages like English or French to programming languages like FORTRAN.

Examples of Algorithms
We use algorithms every day. For example, a recipe for baking a cake is an algorithm. Most programs, with the exception of some artificial intelligence applications, consist of algorithms. Inventing elegant algorithms -- algorithms that are simple and require the fewest steps possible -- is one of the principal challenges in programming.

computer algorithms 

 

 







PREVIOUS
Algae
NEXT
ALI


Related Links
Graphics algorithm FAQ

WEBOPEDIA NEWS
Stay up to date on the latest developments in Internet terminology with a free newsletter from Webopedia. Join to subscribe now.

Email address

LATEST ARTICLES
Texting & Chat Abbreviations
From A3 to ZZZ this guide lists 1,500 text message and online chat abbreviations to help you translate and understand today's texting lingo. Read More »

List of Well-Known TCP Port Numbers
Port numbers 0 to 1024 are reserved for privileged services and designated as well-known ports. This list of port numbers  are specified in... Read More »

STUDY GUIDES
Computer Architecture Study Guide
Computer architecture provides an introduction to system design basics for most computer science students. Read More »

Network Fundamentals Study Guide
Networking fundamentals teaches the building blocks of modern network design. Learn different types of networks, concepts, architecture and... Read More »

The Five Generations of Computers
Learn about each of the five generations of computers and major technology developments that have led to the computing devices that we use... Read More »


Browse Technology Definitions:
ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZ_0123456789
Webopedia
Enter a term...

Definitions:
Browse Terms
Previous Terms
Recent Terms
All Categories
Articles:
Blog
Did You Know
Quick Reference
Study Guides
Slideshows

Site Logo
An eWEEK Property
Terms of Service | Licensing & Reprints | About Us | Privacy Policy | Contact Us | Advertise | Sitemap
Copyright 2019 QuinStreet Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Advertiser Disclosure: Some of the products that appear on this site are from companies from which QuinStreet receives compensation. This compensation may impact how and where products appear on this site including, for example, the order in which they appear. QuinStreet does not include all companies or all types of products available in the marketplace.