https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/algorithm

Merriam-Webster Logo
SINCE 1828
GAMES
BROWSE THESAURUS
WORD OF THE DAY
WORDS AT PLAY
LOG IN
REGISTER
SAVED WORDS
algorithm
DICTIONARY
THESAURUS
Login
or
Register
GAMES
BROWSE THESAURUS
WORD OF THE DAY
WORDS AT PLAY
SAVED WORDS
algorithm noun
Save Word
To save this word, you'll need to log in. 

Log In
al·​go·​rithm | \ ˈal-gə-ˌri-t͟həm  \
Definition of algorithm
: a procedure for solving a mathematical problem (as of finding the greatest common divisor) in a finite number of steps that frequently involves repetition of an operation
broadly : a step-by-step procedure for solving a problem or accomplishing some end
There are several search engines, with Google, Yahoo and Bing being the biggest players. Each search engine has its own proprietary computation (called an "algorithm") that ranks websites for each keyword or combination of keywords.
— Julie Brinton
… sometimes you solve a problem by coming up with an algorithm of some kind. But sometimes you solve a problem in a very ad hoc sort of way.
— William H. Huggins
Other Words from algorithm
What Does algorithm Mean?
More Example Sentences
Learn More about algorithm
Other Words from algorithm
algorithmic \ ˌal-​gə-​ˈrit͟h-​mik  \ adjective
algorithmically \ ˌal-​gə-​ˈrit͟h-​mi-​k(ə-​)lē  \ adverb
What Does algorithm Mean?
The current term of choice for a problem-solving procedure, algorithm, is commonly used nowadays for the set of rules a machine (and especially a computer) follows to achieve a particular goal. It does not always apply to computer-mediated activity, however. The term may as accurately be used of the steps followed in making a pizza or solving a Rubik’s Cube as for computer-powered data analysis.

Algorithm is often paired with words specifying the activity for which a set of rules have been designed. A search algorithm, for example, is a procedure that determines what kind of information is retrieved from a large mass of data. An encryption algorithm is a set of rules by which information or messages are encoded so that unauthorized persons cannot read them.

Though first attested in the early 20th century (and, until recently, used strictly as a term of mathematics and computing), algorithm has a surprisingly deep history. It was formed from algorism “the system of Arabic numerals,” a word that goes back to Middle English and ultimately stems from the name of a 9th-century Persian mathematician, abu-Jaʽfar Mohammed ibn-Mūsa al-Khuwārizmi, who did important work in the fields of algebra and numeric systems.

Examples of algorithm in a Sentence
Recent Examples on the Web
Machine learning experts often design their algorithms to guard against certain unintended consequences.
— Wired, "Researchers Want Guardrails to Help Prevent Bias in AI," 21 Nov. 2019
With their alignment algorithm, Gross’s team was able to use 100 mirrors on a pilot thermal plant that produced 250 kW of thermal power.
— Akshat Rathi, Quartz, "Harnessing the sun’s heat for industry could cut 10% of global carbon emissions," 20 Nov. 2019
These example sentences are selected automatically from various online news sources to reflect current usage of the word 'algorithm.' Views expressed in the examples do not represent the opinion of Merriam-Webster or its editors. Send us feedback.

See More
First Known Use of algorithm
1926, in the meaning defined above

History and Etymology for algorithm
alteration of Middle English algorisme, from Old French & Medieval Latin; Old French, from Medieval Latin algorismus, from Arabic al-khuwārizmi, from al-Khwārizmī flourished a.d. 825 Islamic mathematician

Learn More about algorithm
Share algorithm
Post the Definition of algorithm to FacebookShare the Definition of algorithm on Twitter
Time Traveler for algorithm

The first known use of algorithm was in 1926
See more words from the same year

From the Editors at Merriam-Webster
cat using abacus for arithmetic
We Told You There'd Be No Math. (We Lied.)
Grab your protractor.

Dictionary Entries near algorithm
algophagous

algorism

algorist

algorithm

algorithmics

algous

algraphy

See More Nearby Entries 
Statistics for algorithm
Last Updated

25 Nov 2019

Look-up Popularity

Top 20% of words

Cite this Entry

“Algorithm.” The Merriam-Webster.com Dictionary, Merriam-Webster Inc., https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/algorithm. Accessed 27 November 2019.


More Definitions for algorithm
algorithm noun
English Language Learners Definition of algorithm
technical : a set of steps that are followed in order to solve a mathematical problem or to complete a computer process
See the full definition for algorithm in the English Language Learners Dictionary

More from Merriam-Webster on algorithm
Spanish Central: Translation of algorithm

Nglish: Translation of algorithm for Spanish Speakers

Britannica English: Translation of algorithm for Arabic Speakers

Britannica.com: Encyclopedia article about algorithm

Comments on algorithm
What made you want to look up algorithm? Please tell us where you read or heard it (including the quote, if possible).

Show Comments 
WORD OF THE DAY
fawn
to seek favor by groveling

Get Word of the Day daily email!

Your email address
TEST YOUR VOCABULARY
A Thanksgiving Word Quiz

a traditional thanksgiving dinner
November comes from a word for which of the following numbers?
11
9
10
12
Spell It
Can you spell these 10 commonly misspelled words?

TAKE THE QUIZ
Bee Cubed
Test Your Knowledge - and learn some interesting things along the way.

TAKE THE QUIZ
Love words? Need even more definitions?
Subscribe to America's largest dictionary and get thousands more definitions and advanced search—ad free!

MERRIAM-WEBSTER UNABRIDGED
WORDS AT PLAY
kids-eating-at-table
Kids' Table: A Table with a Mess of Names
It's a question for the adult table.
semicolon-image
A Guide to Using Semicolons
You too can become a semicolon master!
alt-5dd7fb4de906c
The Good, The Bad, & The Semantically Imprecise - 11/22/19
Words from the week of 11/22/2019
alt 5a2ee7b975e2d
Is 'Positively' Positively Legal?
When there's 'positively' none of something

ASK THE EDITORS
hanger-hangar-illustrations
Is It 'Hanger' or 'Hangar'?
How to remember which is which
alt-5db61f2bd1cc5
How Do You Pronounce 'Groceries'?
Is there one standard way?
video literally
Literally
How to use a word that (literally) drives some people nuts.
video his or her
Is Singular 'They' a Better Choice?
The awkward case of 'his or her'

WORD GAMES
a traditional thanksgiving dinner
A Thanksgiving Word Quiz
We are thankful for obscure words.

TAKE THE QUIZ
name that food
Name that Food Quiz
Test your knowledge of food and food words.

TAKE THE QUIZ
Spell It
Spell It
Can you spell these 10 commonly misspelled words?

TAKE THE QUIZ
Bee Cubed
Bee Cubed
Listen to the words and spell through all three levels.

PLAY THE GAME
Merriam Webster
Learn a new word every day. Delivered to your inbox!

Your email address
OTHER MERRIAM-WEBSTER DICTIONARIES

SPANISH CENTRAL
LEARNER'S ESL DICTIONARY
WORDCENTRAL FOR KIDS
VISUAL DICTIONARY
SCRABBLE® WORD FINDER
MERRIAM-WEBSTER'S UNABRIDGED DICTIONARY
BRITANNICA ENGLISH - ARABIC TRANSLATION
NGLISH - SPANISH-ENGLISH TRANSLATION
FOLLOW US

Facebook
Twitter
YouTube
Instagram
Browse the Dictionary:ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZ0-9
Home Help Apps About Us Shop Advertising Info Dictionary API Contact Us Join MWU Video Word of the Year Law Dictionary Medical Dictionary Privacy Policy Terms of Use
Browse the Thesaurus Browse the Medical DictionaryBrowse the Legal DictionaryBrowse the Spanish-English Dictionary
© 2019 Merriam-Webster, Incorporated