Skip to main content
About Us
English
Courses / Programming Courses / CPP: Advanced Programming in C++
Programming
CPP: Advanced Programming in C++
By Cisco Networking Academy in collaboration with OpenEDG C++ Institute


Part two – round out your C++ skills
Here's the chance to build on what you know and become more proficient in the C++ language. This second course, in the 2-course series, is designed for students who already possess an understanding of C++. You'll work with templates and the Standard Template Library, read and understand template functions and classes, and properly use template classes and methods including third-party templates. The course will round out your technology skills, set you apart in the job market, plus, prepare you for the vendor-neutral C++ Certified Professional Programmer Certification (CPP). Prerequisite CPA: Essentials in Programming C++ or equivalent knowledge is required.

If you are already a student, contact your academy.
Length Icon Length: 
70 hours
Cost Icon Cost: 
Determined by Institution
Level Icon
Level: Advanced
Learning type icon
Learning Type: Instructor-led
Language icon
Languages: English
You'll learn these core skills
Learn the C++ template mechanism and write your own C++ programs.
Understand and use elements of the C++ STL library.
Solve programming problems with STL-predefined classes and methods.
Prepare for the C++ Certified Professional Programmer Certification (CPP).
Programming figure
Accelerate your career with Networking Academy
Cisco Networking Academy is an IT skills and career building program for learning institutions and individuals worldwide. Self-paced courses are designed to take at your own pace, at any point in your career journey. More than 9 million people have joined Networking Academy and become a force for change in the global economy since 1997.
IBM logo
verizon logo
ingram micro logo
Red River logo
CDW logo
"Don't be intimidated if you lack networking experience. Academy courses teach from the ground up. It's not easy, but when you come out, you have real-life skills that you can take directly to employers."
Kyle Thoms, NetAcad Alum
Coursework icon
Coursework
Coursework may take place in our online learning environment, in the classroom—or both. Once you enroll, you'll be asked to create an account, then taken to your learning dashboard. Course materials and tests may be accessed from there.

Help from peers icon
Help from your peers
Once enrolled, you have access to student forums where you can ask questions and interact with instructors and peers. Also use our Facebook community, which has more than a million members available for support.

Certificate of completion icon
Certificate of completion
Get a certificate of completion when you complete the course. Then add your coursework to LinkedIn so that hiring recruiters can find you for potential job opportunities.

Courses
About Us
Find an Academy
Teach with us
Hire with us
Partner with us


Follow us

 
 
 
 
 
Cisco Networking Academy, a Cisco Corporate Social Responsibility program, is an IT skills and career building program available to learning institutions and individuals worldwide.

Terms and Conditions Privacy Statement Cookie Policy Data Protection Accessibility Trademarks