https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/6111024


IEEE websites place cookies on your device to give you the best user experience. By using our websites, you agree to the placement of these cookies. To learn more, read our Privacy Policy.
Accept & Close
Skip to Main Content

IEEE.org IEEE Xplore Digital Library IEEE-SA IEEE Spectrum More Sites
Cart (0) Create Account  Personal Sign In
Institutional Sign In
Browse
My Settings
Get Help
Subscribe


Enter keywords or phrases (Note: Searches metadata only by default. A search for 'smart grid' = 'smart AND grid')
Advanced Search
Other Search Options
Conferences > 2011 5th International Confer... 
Parallel bubble sort using stream programming paradigm
Publisher: IEEE
3
Author(s)
Rahim Rashidy ; Saeid Yousefpour ; Mohamad Koohi
View All Authors

1
Paper
Citation

348
Full
Text Views
Abstract
Document Sections
I
Introduction
II
A REVIEW ON JSTREAM LIBRARY
III
Sequential Bubble Sort Algorithm
IV
Bubble Sort with Stream Programming Model
V
Conclusion
Authors
Figures
References
Citations
Keywords
Metrics
Abstract:
Parallel computing has become the dominant paradigm in computer science, mainly in the form of multi core processors. One software approach for parallel programming, is writing programs in streaming model. A stream program is type of computer program such that the input data is stream of data. In this paper we have used stream programming model, and developed the parallel version of bubble sort algorithm. Our source codes are simple java code and used JStream java library. Our algorithm doesn't have any loop statement, witch is increases the time complexity of algorithms. We have chosen bubble sort, because it is the oldest and slowest sorting algorithm with time complexity level of O(n 2 ). In this paper we have shown that our algorithm has lower time complexity. Also our code shows that writing parallel programs in streaming model would be very simple.
Published in: 2011 5th International Conference on Application of Information and Communication Technologies (AICT)
Date of Conference: 12-14 Oct. 2011
Date Added to IEEE Xplore: 22 December 2011
 ISBN Information:
INSPEC Accession Number: 12460384
DOI: 10.1109/ICAICT.2011.6111024
Publisher: IEEE
Conference Location: Baku, Azerbaijan
I Introduction
Parallel computing is a form of computation in witch many calculations are carried simultaneously [1]. It is now well established that parallel computing is moving into the mainstream with a rapid increase in the adoption of multi core processors. Unlike previous generations of mainstream hardware evolution, this shift will have a major impact on existing and future software [2] [3].

Sign in to Continue Reading
Authors
Figures
References
Citations
Keywords
Metrics
More Like This
An Implementation of Sorting Algorithm Based on Java Multi-thread Technology
2012 International Conference on Computer Science and Electronics Engineering

Published: 2012

A Java Framework for High Level Parallel Programming Using Powerlists
2017 18th International Conference on Parallel and Distributed Computing, Applications and Technologies (PDCAT)

Published: 2017

View More
Top Organizations with Patents on Technologies Mentioned in This Article

IEEE Personal Account
CHANGE USERNAME/PASSWORD
Purchase Details
PAYMENT OPTIONS
VIEW PURCHASED DOCUMENTS
Profile Information
COMMUNICATIONS PREFERENCES
PROFESSION AND EDUCATION
TECHNICAL INTERESTS
Need Help?
US & CANADA: +1 800 678 4333
WORLDWIDE: +1 732 981 0060
CONTACT & SUPPORT
Follow
About IEEE Xplore | Contact Us | Help | Accessibility | Terms of Use | Nondiscrimination Policy | Sitemap | Privacy & Opting Out of Cookies

A not-for-profit organization, IEEE is the world's largest technical professional organization dedicated to advancing technology for the benefit of humanity.

© Copyright 2019 IEEE - All rights reserved. Use of this web site signifies your agreement to the terms and conditions.

