https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19733749


NCBINCBI Logo
Skip to main content
Skip to navigation
Resources
How To
About NCBI Accesskeys

PubMed
US National Library of Medicine National Institutes of Health
Search databaseSearch term
Search
AdvancedHelp
Result Filters
Format: AbstractSend to
Prog Brain Res. 2009;176:47-63. doi: 10.1016/S0079-6123(09)17604-5.
Visual streams and shifting attention.
Brown JM1.
Author information
1
Department of Psychology, University of Georgia, Athens, GA, USA. jmbrown@uga.edu
Abstract
Understanding the relationship between bottom-up and top-down processing in visual perception and attention is challenging. An important part of that challenge is studying the roles the parvocellular (P) and magnocellular (M) retino-geniculo-cortical pathways play in visual processing and attention. The P pathway provides the dominant initial input to the ventral stream which plays an important role in object processing and is assumed to be relatively more involved in object-based attention. The faster responding M pathway provides the dominant initial input to the dorsal stream which plays an important role in processing movement and spatial location information and is assumed to be relatively more involved in space-based attention. To gain insight into the relationship between M/dorsal and P/ventral activity and deploying visual attention, we used a covert cuing paradigm to manipulate attention while bottom-up and top-down perceptual stimulus variables created M/dorsal and P/ventral-biased conditions. One study examined the object advantage, where responses are faster for within-relative to equidistant between-object shifts of attention. Visual stream contributions to object- and spaced-based attention were revealed using psychophysically equiluminant conditions expected to reduce M/dorsal activity. Other studies investigating visual stream contributions to location-based inhibition of return (IOR) used IOR magnitude as an indicator of the ease or difficulty of deploying spatial attention. Greater IOR was found under P/ventral-biased conditions. Less IOR was found under M/dorsal-biased conditions. The results support the use of M/dorsal and P/ventral-biased conditions as a valuable strategy for studying the relationship between visual stream activity and shifting attention.

PMID: 19733749 DOI: 10.1016/S0079-6123(09)17604-5
[Indexed for MEDLINE]
Share on FacebookShare on TwitterShare on Google+
Publication type, MeSH terms
LinkOut - more resources
Supplemental Content
Full text links
Icon for Elsevier Science
Save items
View more options
Similar articles
Attending to multiple visual streams: interactions between location-based and category-based attentional selection.
[J Cogn Neurosci. 2009]
Magnocellular and parvocellular pathway influences on location-based inhibition-of-return.
[Perception. 2012]
Neural correlates of visual form and visual spatial processing.
[Hum Brain Mapp. 1999]
Review The advantage in being magnocellular: a few more remarks on attention and the magnocellular system.
[Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 2008]
Review Visual saliency and spike timing in the ventral visual pathway.
[J Physiol Paris. 2003]
See reviews...
See all...
Cited by 5 PubMed Central articles
Young Women do it Better: Sexual Dimorphism in Temporal Discrimination.
[Front Neurol. 2015]
Neurophysiological correlates of various mental perspectives.
[Front Hum Neurosci. 2014]
Enhanced dimension-specific visual working memory in grapheme-color synesthesia.
[Cognition. 2013]
See all...
Related information
Cited in PMC
Recent Activity
ClearTurn Off
Visual streams and shifting attention.
PubMed
An introduction to information retrieval: applications in genomics
See more...
You are here: NCBI > Literature > PubMedSupport Center
Simple NCBI Directory
GETTING STARTED
NCBI Education
NCBI Help Manual
NCBI Handbook
Training & Tutorials
Submit Data
RESOURCES
Chemicals & Bioassays
Data & Software
DNA & RNA
Domains & Structures
Genes & Expression
Genetics & Medicine
Genomes & Maps
Homology
Literature
Proteins
Sequence Analysis
Taxonomy
Variation
POPULAR
PubMed
Bookshelf
PubMed Central
BLAST
Nucleotide
Genome
SNP
Gene
Protein
PubChem
FEATURED
Genetic Testing Registry
GenBank
Reference Sequences
Gene Expression Omnibus
Genome Data Viewer
Human Genome
Mouse Genome
Influenza Virus
Primer-BLAST
Sequence Read Archive
NCBI INFORMATION
About NCBI
Research at NCBI
NCBI News & Blog
NCBI FTP Site
NCBI on Facebook
NCBI on Twitter
NCBI on YouTube
Privacy Policy
NLMNIHDHHSUSA.gov
National Center for Biotechnology Information, U.S. National Library of Medicine
8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda MD, 20894 USA
Policies and Guidelines | Contact