https://www.gartner.com/en/documents/3906723/stream-processing-the-new-data-processing-paradigm


We use cookies to deliver the best possible experience on our website. To learn more, visit our Privacy Policy.
By continuing to use this site, or closing this box, you consent to our use of cookies.

logo
SolutionsInsightsWhat We DoConferencesAboutCareers
 1 855 611 0858
Gartner Research
Stream Processing: The New Data Processing Paradigm
Published: 09 April 2019

ID: G00378063

Analyst(s): Sumit Pal

Summary
Digital businesses must use stream processing to meet their needs for continuous intelligence and real-time analytics. This research helps technical professionals implement stream processing architectures for data integration, event processing and analytics.

Table Of Contents
Analysis

What Is Stream Processing?
Batch vs. Stream Processing
Stream Processing Approaches
Stream Processing Architectural Components
Streaming Ingestion and Integration
Stream Processing Engine
Streaming Analytics/Streaming ML
Stream Processing Databases
Types of Streaming Systems
Stream Processing Engines and Frameworks
Stream Processing Libraries
Streaming Data Flow Systems
Stream Processing Products
Stream Processing Selection Criteria
Major Challenges in Stream Processing
Strengths
Weaknesses
Guidance

Which Streaming Type Should You Use?
Choosing Frameworks, Engines Libraries or Data Flow Systems
The Details

Stream Processing Concepts
Processing Semantics and Delivery Guarantees
Concept of Multiple Types of Times in a Streaming Application
Windowing
Using Watermarks for Managing Time Windows
Checkpointing
State Management
Back Pressure
Gartner Recommended Reading

©2019 Gartner, Inc. and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved. Gartner is a registered trademark of Gartner, Inc. and its affiliates. This publication may not be reproduced or distributed in any form without Gartner’s prior written permission. It consists of the opinions of Gartner’s research organization, which should not be construed as statements of fact. While the information contained in this publication has been obtained from sources believed to be reliable, Gartner disclaims all warranties as to the accuracy, completeness or adequacy of such information. Although Gartner research may address legal and financial issues, Gartner does not provide legal or investment advice and its research should not be construed or used as such. Your access and use of this publication are governed by Gartner’s Usage Policy. Gartner prides itself on its reputation for independence and objectivity. Its research is produced independently by its research organization without input or influence from any third party. For further information, see Guiding Principles on Independence and Objectivity.

Already have a Gartner Account?
Become a client
Learn how to access this content as a Gartner client.

Gartner
About Gartner
Careers
Newsroom
Ombudsman
Investor Relations
Policies
Gartner Glossary
Contact Gartner
Privacy Policy
Terms of Use
    
©2019 Gartner, Inc. and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved.