https://exercism.io/tracks/common-lisp


ExercismSign up Log in
Home Language tracks Common Lisp Track
Track Common Lisp
Common Lisp
A programmable programming language.
Track mentors
5 Mentors
Our mentors are friendly, experienced Common Lisp developers who will help teach you new techniques and tricks.
Track students
1,268 Students
Join hundreds of students who have enjoyed learning and improving their skills by taking this track.
Track exercises
42 Exercises
Hundreds of hours have gone into making these exercises fun, useful, and challenging to help you enjoy learning.
About Common Lisp
(defun distance (str1 str2
                 &key (test #'char=))
  "Number of positional differences in
   two equal length strings."
  (when (= (length str1) (length str2))
    (count nil
           (map 'list test str1 str2))))
Common Lisp is an offshoot of the long-running family of Lisp programming languages. It's a multi-paradigm programming language that allows you to choose the approach and paradigm according to your application domain.

Common Lisp has fast prototyping capabilities, and exceptional support for object oriented programming. It also boasts a macro system which allows you to adapt the language to your needs, and a run-time environment which allows modification of running applications.

To learn more about Common Lisp, take a look at the Common Lisp homepage.


Exercism is a great website
Exercism is a great website where I was able to have some very interesting challenges.

Bud Chirica, Scotland
Relaxed. Encouraging. Supportive.
Meet the Common Lisp Track mentors 
Once you join the Common Lisp language track, you will receive support and feedback from our team of mentors. Here are the bios of a few of the mentors of this track.

Avatar of Tim Hawes
Tim Hawes https://github.com/timotheosh
I love Lisp, functional programming, and the nostalgia behind Common Lisp.
Avatar of Brooks J Rady
Brooks J Rady thelostlambda.xyz
Lover of functional programming, writing code that writes code for me, and (evidently) parentheses.
Avatar of Mark Simpson
Mark Simpson https://github.com/verdammelt
I have always been interested in Lisps since taking the SICP course in college. I love the expressiveness and conciseness of the simple syntax, and the ability to build the language upward to meet the domain.
Avatar of Tushar Tyagi
Tushar Tyagi https://github.com/tushartyagi
I dabble with Common Lisp and find it interesting because of minimal syntax and the amazing functionalities which the syntax brings.
Avatar of Pierre Thierry
Pierre Thierry https://github.com/kephas
I fell in love with Common Lisp for its interactivity, metaprogramming and uniform syntax. If I have any say, it's usually my language of choice for both professional and personal projects.
Fun. Challenging. Interesting
Community-sourced Common Lisp exercises
These are a few of the 42 exercises on the Common Lisp track. You can see all the exercises here.

ETL
EASY
control flow loops maps transforming
Crypto Square
EASY
arrays control flow conditionals control flow loops strings transforming
Two Fer
EASY
strings optional values text formatting
Hello World
EASY
strings
Meetup
EASY
control flow conditionals dates filtering
Anagram
EASY
equality filtering strings
Passionate. Knowledgeable. Creative.
Meet the Common Lisp Track maintainers 
The Common Lisp Maintainers are the brains behind the Common Lisp Track. They spend their spare time creating interesting and challenging exercises that we can all learn from. We are incredibly grateful for their hard work. Here are the bios of a few of the maintainers of this track.

Avatar of Mark Simpson
Mark Simpson Code and Cocktails
I have always been interested in Lisps since taking the SICP course in college. I love the expressiveness and conciseness of the simple syntax, and the ability to build the language upward to meet the domain.
Get started with the Common Lisp track. As with everything on Exercism, it's 100% free!
About
Exercism: Personal Edition
Exercism: Teams Edition
About Exercism
Our values
Our team
Help
FAQs
Getting started
Installing the CLI
Interactive CLI walkthrough
Get involved
Contribute
Become a mentor
Become a maintainer
Exercism's roadmap
Legal & Privacy
Terms
Privacy
Code of conduct
Keep in touch
Exercism's Blog
Newsletter
Discuss on GitHub
Contact us
Report abuse
Follow
  
© 2019 ExercismMade with  and  by Katrina Owen, Thalamus and 1,801 wonderful volunteers.