https://www.webopedia.com/TERM/Q/query.html


Webopedia
Enter a term...
Search
Advertiser Disclosure
MAIN
BROWSE TERMS
DID YOU KNOW?
REFERENCE
ALL CATEGORIES
STUDY GUIDES
BLOG
SLIDESHOWS
SPONSORED
Main » TERM » Q »
query


By Vangie Beal
Related Terms
SQL - structured query language
query language
query string
XMLHttpRequest
HTTP request header
XQuery
ARQ - Automatic Repeat reQuest
query by example
SQL injection
IRQ - interrupt request line
(n.) A query is a request for information from a database. There are three general methods for posing queries:

Choosing parameters from a menu: In this method, the database system presents a list of parameters from which you can choose. This is perhaps the easiest way to pose a query because the menus guide you, but it is also the least flexible.
Query by example (QBE): In this method, the system presents a blank record and lets you specify the fields and values that define the query.
Query language: Many database systems require you to make requests for information in the form of a stylized query that must be written in a special query language. This is the most complex method because it forces you to learn a specialized language, but it is also the most powerful.
(v.) To make a request for information from a database.





IT Solutions BuilderTOP IT RESOURCES TO MOVE YOUR BUSINESS FORWARD

Which topic are you interested in?

Mobile


Security


Networks/IoT


Cloud


Data Storage


Applications


Development


IT Management


Other



PREVIOUS
qubit
NEXT
query by example


Related Links
Introduction to the SQL Database Query

WEBOPEDIA NEWS
Stay up to date on the latest developments in Internet terminology with a free newsletter from Webopedia. Join to subscribe now.

Email address

LATEST ARTICLES
Texting & Chat Abbreviations
From A3 to ZZZ this guide lists 1,500 text message and online chat abbreviations to help you translate and understand today's texting lingo. Read More »

List of Well-Known TCP Port Numbers
Port numbers 0 to 1024 are reserved for privileged services and designated as well-known ports. This list of port numbers  are specified in... Read More »

STUDY GUIDES
Computer Architecture Study Guide
Computer architecture provides an introduction to system design basics for most computer science students. Read More »

Network Fundamentals Study Guide
Networking fundamentals teaches the building blocks of modern network design. Learn different types of networks, concepts, architecture and... Read More »

The Five Generations of Computers
Learn about each of the five generations of computers and major technology developments that have led to the computing devices that we use... Read More »


Browse Technology Definitions:
ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZ_0123456789
Webopedia
Enter a term...

Definitions:
Browse Terms
Previous Terms
Recent Terms
All Categories
Articles:
Blog
Did You Know
Quick Reference
Study Guides
Slideshows

Site Logo
An eWEEK Property
Terms of Service | Licensing & Reprints | About Us | Privacy Policy | Contact Us | Advertise | Sitemap
Copyright 2019 QuinStreet Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Advertiser Disclosure: Some of the products that appear on this site are from companies from which QuinStreet receives compensation. This compensation may impact how and where products appear on this site including, for example, the order in which they appear. QuinStreet does not include all companies or all types of products available in the marketplace.