https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/data-mining/

We use cookies to ensure you have the best browsing experience on our website. By using our site, you acknowledge that you have read and understood our Cookie Policy & Privacy Policy
Got it!
GeeksforGeeks
Skip to content
Tutorialskeyboard_arrow_down Studentskeyboard_arrow_down Courses
Custom Search

Login
Hire with us!
Data Mining
Data Warehousing
Data Mining
Difference between Soft Computing and Hard Computing
Python | Speech recognition on large audio files
ML | Training Image Classifier using Tensorflow Object Detection API
TensorFlow 2.0
Extendible Hashing (Dynamic approach to DBMS)
Data Mining | Set 2
Python | Mean Squared Error
Data Normalization in Data Mining
Van Emde Boas Tree | Set 1 | Basics and Construction
Data Integration in Data Mining
AI Model For Neurodegenerative Diseases
Cyber Security in Cloud computing
Blockchain to Secure IoT Data
Numerosity Reduction in Data Mining
Age of AI-based recruitment... What to expect?
r-Nearest neighbors
Pattern Recognition | Phases and Activities
Matlab | Edge Detection of an image without using in-built function
Weiler Atherton - Polygon Clipping Algorithm
Web Mining
Matlab | Dilation of an Image
Difference between Fuzzification and Defuzzification
Pattern Recognition | Basics and Design Principles
Proto Van Emde Boas Tree | Set 3 | Insertion and isMember Query
Proto Van Emde Boas Trees | Set 4 | Deletion
Filter Color with OpenCV
OpenCV | Saving an Image

perm_identity
Data Mining
In general terms, “Mining” is the process of extraction of some valuable material from the earth e.g. coal mining, diamond mining etc. In the context of computer science, “Data Mining” refers to the extraction of useful information from a bulk of data or data warehouses. One can see that the term itself is a little bit confusing. In case of coal or diamond mining, the result of extraction process is coal or diamond. But in case of Data Mining, the result of extraction process is not data!! Instead, the result of data mining is the patterns and knowledge that we gain at the end of the extraction process. In that sense, Data Mining is also known as Knowledge Discovery or Knowledge Extraction.

Gregory Piatetsky-Shapiro coined the term “Knowledge Discovery in Databases” in 1989. However, the term ‘data mining’ became more popular in the business and press communities. Currently, Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery are used interchangeably.

Now a days, data mining is used in almost all the places where a large amount of data is stored and processed. For example, banks typically use ‘data mining’ to find out their prospective customers who could be interested in credit cards, personal loans or insurances as well. Since banks have the transaction details and detailed profiles of their customers, they analyze all this data and try to find out patterns which help them predict that certain customers could be interested in personal loans etc.

Main Purpose of Data Mining
Basically, the information gathered from Data Mining helps to predict hidden patterns, future trends and behaviors and allowing businesses to take decisions.

Technically, data mining is the computational process of analyzing data from different perspective, dimensions, angles and categorizing/summarizing it into meaningful information.
Data Mining can be applied to any type of data e.g. Data Warehouses, Transactional Databases, Relational Databases, Multimedia Databases, Spatial Databases, Time-series Databases, World Wide Web.



Data Mining as a whole process
The whole process of Data Mining comprises of three main phases:
1. Data Pre-processing – Data cleaning, integration, selection and transformation takes place
2. Data Extraction – Occurrence of exact data mining
3. Data Evaluation and Presentation – Analyzing and presenting results

datamining

In future articles, we will cover the details of each of these phase.

Applications of Data Mining
1. Financial Analysis
2. Biological Analysis
3. Scientific Analysis
4. Intrusion Detection
5. Fraud Detection
6. Research Analysis

Real life example of Data Mining – Market Basket Analysis
Market Basket Analysis is a technique which gives the careful study of purchases done by a customer in a super market. The concept is basically applied to identify the items that are bought together by a customer. Say, if a person buys bread, what are the chances that he/she will also purchase butter. This analysis helps in promoting offers and deals by the companies. The same is done with the help of data mining.

This article is contributed by Sheena Kohli. If you like GeeksforGeeks and would like to contribute, you can also write an article using contribute.geeksforgeeks.org or mail your article to contribute@geeksforgeeks.org. See your article appearing on the GeeksforGeeks main page and help other Geeks.

Please write comments if you find anything incorrect, or you want to share more information about the topic discussed above.



Recommended Posts:
Difference between Data Warehousing and Data Mining
Types of Sources of Data in Data Mining
Data Mining | Set 2
Data Preprocessing in Data Mining
Data Normalization in Data Mining
Data Integration in Data Mining
Challenges of Data Mining
KDD Process in Data Mining
Numerosity Reduction in Data Mining
Redundancy and Correlation in Data Mining
Basic Concept of Classification (Data Mining)
Relationship between Data Mining and Machine Learning
Attribute Subset Selection in Data Mining
Frequent Item set in Data set (Association Rule Mining)
Web Mining


Article Tags : 
Advanced Computer Subject
DBMS
data mining
Practice Tags : 
DBMS

thumb_up
7


 
2.2

Based on 9 vote(s)
Feedback/ Suggest ImprovementAdd NotesImprove Article  
Please write to us at contribute@geeksforgeeks.org to report any issue with the above content.
Post navigation
Previous
first_page Buffer Overflow Attack with Example
Next
last_pageData Warehousing




Writing code in comment? Please use ide.geeksforgeeks.org, generate link and share the link here.


Load Comments

auto
Most popular in Advanced Computer Subject
Proto Van Emde Boas Tree | Set 5 | Queries: Minimum, Maximum
Proto Van Emde Boas Tree | Set 6 | Query : Successor and Predecessor
Python | Positional Index
Spelling Correction using K-Gram Overlap
OpenCV | Loading Video

Most visited in DBMS
MySQL | Database Files
Neo4j Installation
Concurrency problems in DBMS Transactions
Neo4j Create Index
Neo4j Create Node


✍
Write a Testimonial
⇣
GeeksforGeeks
5th Floor, A-118,
Sector-136, Noida, Uttar Pradesh - 201305
feedback@geeksforgeeks.org
COMPANY
About Us
Careers
Privacy Policy
Contact Us
LEARN
Algorithms
Data Structures
Languages
CS Subjects
Video Tutorials
PRACTICE
Courses
Company-wise
Topic-wise
How to begin?
CONTRIBUTE
Write an Article
Write Interview Experience
Internships
Videos
    
@geeksforgeeks, Some rights reserved
