https://www.techopedia.com/definition/1181/data-mining


Techopedia - Where IT and Business MeetTOPICSWEBINARSDOWNLOADSDICTIONARYTUTORIALSQ & ARESOURCES
TRENDING:
VIRTUALIZATIONMACHINE LEARNINGBIG DATAENTERPRISEDEVELOPMENTMORE
Search...

Topics
Webinars
Downloads
Dictionary
Tutorials
Q & A
Resources
Trending
More
Home  Dictionary  Tags  Enterprise 
Data Mining
Definition - What does Data Mining mean?
Data mining is the process of analyzing hidden patterns of data according to different perspectives for categorization into useful information, which is collected and assembled in common areas, such as data warehouses, for efficient analysis, data mining algorithms, facilitating business decision making and other information requirements to ultimately cut costs and increase revenue.

Data mining is also known as data discovery and knowledge discovery.

Techopedia explains Data Mining
The major steps involved in a data mining process are:

Extract, transform and load data into a data warehouse
Store and manage data in a multidimensional databases
Provide data access to business analysts using application software
Present analyzed data in easily understandable forms, such as graphs
The first step in data mining is gathering relevant data critical for business. Company data is either transactional, non-operational or metadata. Transactional data deals with day-to-day operations like sales, inventory and cost etc. Non-operational data is normally forecast, while metadata is concerned with logical database design. Patterns and relationships among data elements render relevant information, which may increase organizational revenue. Organizations with a strong consumer focus deal with data mining techniques providing clear pictures of products sold, price, competition and customer demographics.
For instance, the retail giant Wal-Mart transmits all its relevant information to a data warehouse with terabytes of data. This data can easily be accessed by suppliers enabling them to identify customer buying patterns. They can generate patterns on shopping habits, most shopped days, most sought for products and other data utilizing data mining techniques.

The second step in data mining is selecting a suitable algorithm - a mechanism producing a data mining model. The general working of the algorithm involves identifying trends in a set of data and using the output for parameter definition. The most popular algorithms used for data mining are classification algorithms and regression algorithms, which are used to identify relationships among data elements. Major database vendors like Oracle and SQL incorporate data mining algorithms, such as clustering and regression tress, to meet the demand for data mining.

Share this:  
Related Terms
Online Analytical Processing (OLAP)
Business Intelligence (BI)
Data Analytics
Big Data Analytics
Data Audit
Email Extractor
Web Mining
Small Data
Predictive Data Mining
Knowledge Discovery in Databases (KDD)
Techopedia - Where IT and Business Meet	
Tech moves fast! Stay ahead of the curve with Techopedia!
Join nearly 200,000 subscribers who receive actionable tech insights from Techopedia.

Enter your email address...
Recommended Resources
Related Articles
Data Analytics: Experts to Follow on Twitter 
Data Analytics: Experts to Follow on Twitter
What the $#@! Is Data Discovery? 
What the $#@! Is Data Discovery?
7 Things You Must Know About Big Data Before Adoption 
7 Things You Must Know About Big Data Before Adoption
The Key to Quality Big Data Analytics: Understanding 'Different' - TechWise Episode 4 Transcript 
The Key to Quality Big Data Analytics: Understanding 'Different' - TechWise Episode 4 Transcript
5 Insights About Big Data (Hadoop) as a Service 
5 Insights About Big Data (Hadoop) as a Service
The Growing Cybersecurity War on the Healthcare Industry 
The Growing Cybersecurity War on the Healthcare Industry
+ View More Articles
Related Tutorials
Introduction to Databases 
Introduction to Databases
Related Questions
What is the difference between big data and data mining?
How can I learn big data analytics?
What is TensorFlow’s role in machine learning?
Can there ever be too much data in big data?
What are some significant challenges companies are facing when it comes to management reporting?
Featured Q&A
What is the difference between big data and data mining?
What is the difference between big data and Hadoop?
What does big data do?
More of your questions answered by our Experts
Related Tags
DatabasesData ManagementEnterpriseDataAnalyticsBig Data
Synonyms:
Knowledge Discovery
RESOURCES
The Ultimate Guide to Applying AI in Business	The Ultimate Guide to Applying AI in Business:
Free Download: Machine Learning and Why It Matters	Free Download: Machine Learning and Why It Matters:
FREE DOWNLOAD: AI and ML in the Oil and Gas Industry	FREE DOWNLOAD: AI and ML in the Oil and Gas Industry:
AI in the Insurance Industry: 26 Real-World Use Cases	AI in the Insurance Industry: 26 Real-World Use Cases:
FREE WEBINAR | Managing Multiple Database Roles: How Many Hats Do You Wear?	FREE WEBINAR | Managing Multiple Database Roles: How Many Hats Do You Wear?:
LATEST ARTICLES
Understanding Biometric Security: The Growing Threats and How to Beat Them 	
Understanding Biometric Security: The Growing Threats and How to Beat Them
Neurotechnology Vs. Neural Networks: What’s the Difference? 	
Neurotechnology Vs. Neural Networks: What’s the Difference?
The Growing Cybersecurity War on the Healthcare Industry 	
The Growing Cybersecurity War on the Healthcare Industry
IoT in 2020: What's Next? 	
IoT in 2020: What's Next?
Immersive Graphical Displays of Information: How Mixed Reality Technology is Changing the Game 	
Immersive Graphical Displays of Information: How Mixed Reality Technology is Changing the Game
ABOUT
About
Advertising Info
Contact Us
Write for Us
CONTENT
Topics
Dictionary
Q&A
Tutorials
TOPICS
Cloud Computing
Security
Big Data
Online Privacy
Machine Learning
IT Business
Data Management
All Topics
CONNECT
 Facebook
 Twitter
 LinkedIn
 Feed
MORE
Webinars
Downloads
Newsletters
Techopedia Terms:    #    A    B    C    D    E    F    G    H    I    J    K    L    M    N    O    P    Q    R    S    T    U    V    W    X    Y    Z   

Copyright © 2019 Techopedia Inc. - Terms of Use - Privacy Policy

Notifications Powered By 
