https://www.theverge.com/2019/12/2/20992602/amazon-is-now-offering-quantum-computing-as-a-service


Skip to main content
The Verge homepage
Follow The Verge online:
  
Log in or sign up
Site searchSearch
The Verge main menu
TECH 
REVIEWS 
SCIENCE 
CREATORS 
ENTERTAINMENT 
VIDEO
MORE 
Search
FILED UNDER:
WEB
 
BUSINESS
 
TECH
Amazon is now offering quantum computing as a service
5
It’s a “development environment,” but baby steps

By Sean Hollister@StarFire2258  Dec 2, 2019, 6:20pm EST
Share this story
Share this on Facebook (opens in new window)
Share this on Twitter (opens in new window)
SHARE
All sharing options

Illustration by Alex Castro / The Verge
Google and IBM may be battling for quantum supremacy, but Amazon is currently happy to be a middleman — today, it’s announcing and launching a preview of Amazon Braket, its attempt to turn the nascent field of quantum computing into a service you can access over the internet, a month after Microsoft did something similar. “Amazon Braket is a fully managed AWS service, with security & encryption baked in at each level,” the company explains in a blog post.

For now, it sounds like a pretty limited affair, where “you” will mean Amazon’s corporate customers, and where “service” means the ability to experiment by running simulations on a set of existing quantum computers from partners D-Wave, IonQ, and Rigetti. (IonQ is also a Microsoft Azure Quantum partner.)

AMAZON IS PARTNERING TO START
“This new service is designed to let you get some hands-on experience with qubits and quantum circuits. You can build and test your circuits in a simulated environment and then run them on an actual quantum computer,” writes Amazon.

But Amazon says it’s also creating the “AWS Center for Quantum Computing,” a physical lab near the California Institute of Technology (Caltech) where it may research quantum computers of its own — and more uses for quantum computers, for that matter. The company’s director of quantum computing confirmed to Wired that Amazon is working on quantum hardware.

Theoretically, quantum computers could calculate far faster than traditional supercomputers thanks to the fact that their bits can exist in multiple quantum states instead of simply being on (1) or off (0), and that’s what Google recently claimed it had achieved with its 54-qubit Sycamore quantum computer. The company says its machine successfully made a calculation that would take the world’s most powerful supercomputer 10,000 years.

But quantum computers are also rare and extremely expensive, so Amazon and Microsoft are each attempting to turn them into a shared, managed, and potentially scalable resource, like Amazon already does with its highly valuable AWS cloud computing platform. That invisible server empire serves as backbone for many of the internet services you use today.

Update, 8:56 PM ET: I’d missed that Microsoft also announced a similar Azure Quantum service last month, and I’ve updated to mention it.

NEXT UP IN TECH
Plex launches its free movie and TV streaming service
Why Final Fantasy became the face of Sony’s first PlayStation
Motorola’s new One Hyper has a pop-up camera, Android 10, and a $400 price tag
The Verge under $25 gift guide 2019
Google’s third era
Spotting drivers on their phone is just the tip of the iceberg for AI-enabled cameras
GOOD DEALS
The best Cyber Monday deals that you can still find
Here are the best Cyber Monday deals you should check out today
MORE IN GOOD DEALS
Sign up for the newsletterCommand Line
Command Line delivers daily updates from the near-future.

Email (required)
By signing up, you agree to our Privacy Policy and European users agree to the data transfer policy.
SUBSCRIBE
RECOMMENDED
T-Mobile’s "nationwide" 5G network is now live
T-Mobile’s "nationwide" 5G network is now live
Jony Ive has left Apple
Jony Ive has left Apple
‘The time is now to have a federal privacy bill,’ says Tim Cook
‘The time is now to have a federal privacy bill,’ says Tim Cook
Recommended by
Loading comments...
Terms of Use Privacy Policy Cookie Policy GDPR Commitment Communications Preferences
Contact Tip Us Community Guidelines About Ethics Statement
All Systems OperationalCheck out our status page for more details.
Advertise with us
Jobs @ Vox Media
© 2019 Vox Media, LLC. All Rights Reserved