https://www.wsj.com/articles/amazon-rolls-out-quantum-computing-service-11575314729


DOW JONES, A NEWS CORP COMPANY
DJIA27686.88 0.67%▲	Nasdaq8568.86 0.57%▲	U.S. 10 Yr-27/32 Yield1.774%▼	Crude Oil58.44 4.17%▲	Euro1.1088 0.06%▲
SubscribeSign In
Cyber Monday Sale Try 2 Months for $1
The Wall Street Journal
English Edition
December 4, 2019

Print EditionVideo
Home
World
U.S.
Politics
Economy
Business
Tech
Markets
Opinion
Life & Arts
Real Estate
WSJ. Magazine
YOU HAVE BEEN SELECTEDWSJ wants to hear from you. Take part in this short survey to help shape The Journal. Take Survey
SHARE
TEXT
CIO JOURNAL
Amazon Rolls Out Quantum-Computing Service
Select customers will be able to test quantum algorithms, hardware


Amazon Web Services said the new service, Amazon Braket, is ‘in preview’ as of Monday. PHOTO: JASON ALDEN/BLOOMBERG NEWS
By Sara Castellanos
Dec. 2, 2019 2:25 pm ET
Amazon. com Inc.’s cloud-services division is offering select enterprise customers the ability to experiment with early-stage quantum-computing services over the cloud, following other companies racing to commercialize the emerging technology.

Amazon Web Services Inc. said the new service, Amazon Braket, is “in preview” as of Monday. The platform lets enterprise customers explore how they could benefit from quantum computers by developing and testing quantum algorithms in simulations. Clients will also have access to different early-stage quantum-computing hardware from providers including D-Wave Systems Inc., IonQ Inc. and Rigetti Computing.

“Customers are asking for ways to experiment with quantum computers and explore the technology’s potential,” Charlie Bell, a senior vice president at AWS, said in a statement.

Braket refers to “bra-ket,” a standard notation for describing quantum states. The service is expected to launch to all customers in 2020.

MORE FROM CIO JOURNAL
Amazon Rolls Out Quantum-Computing Service December 2, 2019
Blockchain, 3-D Printing Combine to Make Aircraft Parts November 26, 2019
Older IT Workers Left Out Despite Tech Talent Shortage November 25, 2019
The tech giant joins Microsoft Corp. , Alphabet Inc. ’s Google and International Business Machines Corp. in announcing quantum-computing efforts. Microsoft and IBM are also allowing companies to experiment with quantum-computing hardware over their respective clouds. Amazon and Microsoft dominate in cloud computing. Together, the companies held 60% of the cloud market last year.

Boeing Co. said it plans to collaborate with AWS in exploring potential applications for quantum computing, including how the technology could potentially speed up materials-science research and how it could secure communications.

Quantum computing could also be useful for transportation and logistics companies, including Amazon, said Bill Vass, vice president of technology at AWS. The technology could help find more efficient routes to get deliveries from one place to another while avoiding traffic, all in near real-time, he said. “Quantum computing has the potential to solve some complicated problems that are hard to get done with current algorithms on existing computers,” he said.

He declined to disclose how much AWS is investing in the technology, but said it is a significant amount.

Amazon Web Services also said in a blog post Monday that as part of its quantum push, it is establishing the AWS Center for Quantum Computing near the California Institute of Technology campus in Pasadena, Calif., bringing together experts from the company, Caltech and other institutions. The goal is to research technology that might enable quantum computers to be mass-produced and to identify applications that are best solved on quantum computers, according to the AWS blog post.

By harnessing the properties of quantum physics, quantum computers have the potential to sort through a vast number of possibilities in nearly real time and come up with a probable solution. While traditional computers store information as either zeros or ones, quantum computers use quantum bits, or qubits, which represent and store information as both zeros and ones simultaneously.

No commercial-grade quantum computer has been built yet. IBM has offered customers access to early-stage quantum-computing machines over its cloud since 2016. Google in October announced a quantum-computing experiment that generated about 1 million random strings of numbers in roughly three minutes, a task the company said would have taken the world’s fastest conventional supercomputer 10,000 years—though scientists at IBM disagreed, saying the task could be handled by a traditional computer in 2½ days.

Microsoft in November unveiled cloud-based quantum-computing tools that companies can use to speed up calculations on classical computers, among other things.

Related Video
How Cloud Computing Became a Big Tech Battleground
YOU MAY ALSO LIKE

UP NEXT


How Cloud Computing Became a Big Tech Battleground
How Cloud Computing Became a Big Tech Battleground
Big tech firms are investing in data centers as they compete for the $214 billion cloud computing market. WSJ explains what cloud computing is, why big tech is betting big on future contracts.
While new innovations in quantum computing are happening daily, it is hard to predict when a commercial-grade quantum computer will be built that can add real business value, said Simone Severini, director of quantum computing at AWS.

“We believe a substantial amount of work will need to be done for the promise of quantum computing to become real,” he said.

Write to Sara Castellanos at sara.castellanos@wsj.com

Copyright ©2019 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 87990cbe856818d5eddac44c7b1cdeb8
RECOMMENDED VIDEOS
https://m.wsj.net/video/20190703/070419gasprices/070419gasprices_115x65.jpg
Why Gas Prices Vary From Pump to Pump
https://m.wsj.net/video/20191203/120319nato/120319nato_115x65.jpg
Alliance Divided: NATO’s Identity Crisis, Explained
https://m.wsj.net/video/20191126/112619dresdenheist1/112619dresdenheist1_115x65.jpg
Thieves Smash Jewelry Case, Steal Nearly 100 Pieces in German Museum Heist
https://m.wsj.net/video/20191126/20191125ansari/20191125ansari_115x65.jpg
In the Elevator with The First Female Space Tourist
https://m.wsj.net/video/20191203/seib120419v2/seib120419v2_115x65.jpg
Why the 2020 Election Calendar May Help Trump in Impeachment Inquiry
MOST POPULAR ARTICLES
Chew on This: Gum That Promises to Help You Sleep and Make You Skinny
Chew on This: Gum That Promises to Help You Sleep and Make You Skinny
The Rock, From Strength to Strength
The Rock, From Strength to Strength
Kamala Harris to Drop Out of Presidential Race
Kamala Harris to Drop Out of Presidential Race
An NBA Player Wanted to Lose Weight. He Drank Beer.
An NBA Player Wanted to Lose Weight. He Drank Beer.
Why Bloomberg’s Candidacy Is Terminal
Opinion: Why Bloomberg’s Candidacy Is Terminal
WSJ opens select articles to reader conversation to promote thoughtful dialogue. See the 'Join the Conversation' area to the right for stories open to conversation. For more information, please reference our community guidelines. Email feedback and questions to moderator@wsj.com.
WHAT TO READ NEXT...

BUSINESS
U.S. Tech Giants Bet Big on India. Now It’s Changing the Rules.

TECH
Google Co-Founders Page, Brin Give Up Management Roles

CIO JOURNAL
Amazon Introduces ‘Plug and Play’ AI Tools

POLITICS
Trump to Leave NATO Summit Early After Video Flap

FEATURE
The Gem of the French Riviera—For 150 Years

Independent of The Wall Street Journal newsroom
INDUSTRIES
Peloton’s viral ad captures a ‘116 lb woman’s YEARLONG fitness journey to becoming a 112 lb woman’
 

MANSION GLOBAL ARTICLE
Hedge Fund Billionaire Buys Priciest House in Palm Beach History for $111 Million
SPONSORED OFFERS
MACY'S:
Macy's promo code: Extra 30% off + 15% off BeautyNIKE:
Cyber Week Nike coupon code: $30 off $150COACH:
50% off women's styles + free shipping with COACH promo codeEASTBAY:
Save 25% off with Eastbay promo codeTRAVELOCITY:
Get $150 off with a Travelocity coupon on Cyber WeekFOOT LOCKER:
15% off $75+ with this Foot Locker coupon
JOIN THE CONVERSATION
Trump to Leave NATO Summit Early After Video FlapTrump Risks Further Isolation as Macron Relationship SoursCelebrities Seek Her Advice. M.B.A.s, Executives Line Up for Her Harvard Class.Celebrities Seek Her Advice. M.B.A.s, Executives Line Up for Her Harvard Class.Trump Administration to Stiffen Food-Stamp Work RequirementTrump Administration to Curb States’ Control of Food AidGoogle Co-Founders Page, Brin Give Up Management RolesSundar Pichai to replace Larry Page as CEO of AlphabetSongbirds Are Shrinking in Size, Study FindsSongbirds Are Shrinking in Size, Study FindsHospital Groups Sue to Block Price-Transparency RuleHospital Groups Sue to Block Price-Transparency RuleNYC Coffee Startup Tamps Down Bro Culture by Hiring PhilosopherNYC Coffee Startup Tamps Down Bro Culture by Hiring PhilosopherU.S. Tech Giants Bet Big on India. Now It’s Changing the Rules.U.S. Tech Giants Bet Big on India. Now the Rules Are Changing.Chew on This: Gum That Promises to Help You Sleep and Make You SkinnyChew on This: Gum That Promises to Help You Sleep and Make You SkinnyHere Comes the Merch: Sony Strikes Deal for Beatles MemorabiliaHere Comes the Merch: Sony Strikes Deal for Beatles Memorabilia
The Wall Street Journal
English Edition
Subscribe NowSign In
BACK TO TOP«
WSJ Membership

WSJ+ Membership Benefits
Subscription Options
Why Subscribe?
Corporate Subscriptions
Professor Journal
Student Journal
WSJ High School Program
WSJ Amenity Program
Customer Service

Customer Center
Contact Us
Tools & Features

Emails & Alerts
Guides
My News
RSS Feeds
Video Center
Watchlist
Podcasts
Ads

Advertise
Commercial Real Estate Ads
Place a Classified Ad
Sell Your Business
Sell Your Home
Recruitment & Career Ads
More

About the Newsroom
Content Partnerships
Corrections
Jobs at WSJ
Masthead
News Archive
Register for Free
Reprints
Buy Issues
Facebook
Twitter
Instagram
YouTube
Podcasts
Snapchat
Google Play
App Store
Dow Jones ProductsBarron'sBigChartsDow Jones DNADow Jones NewswiresFactivaFinancial NewsMansion GlobalMarketWatchPrivate Marketsrealtor.comRisk & ComplianceVenturesourceWSJ ConferenceWSJ Pro Central BankingWSJ VideoWSJ Wine
Privacy PolicyCookie PolicyCopyright PolicyData PolicySubscriber Agreement & Terms of UseYour Ad Choices
Copyright ©2019 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
